Welcome back in this lesson we're going to be looking at console log and how we can use console log
in order to debug applications and also find out more information about what's happening with their
script as it's being executed.
So one of the reasons that I like to use Chrome is because it's got the ability to access dev tools.
Now dev tools comes available in every version of chrome.
So if you have chrome installed on your computer you can access the tools.
If you're on a Mac you can do command opt.
If you're on a Windows machine it's control shift.
And both of those when you've got your browser open you can open up dev tools as well as you can go
into the top right hand browser menu here and you can select Tools and dev tools and you can also open
it that way.
If you are on a Windows machine you can go and right click anywhere on the page click inspect and you
can open them up that way as well.
So a number of different ways to open up dev tools and this is why I really like to use Chrome because
dev tools is a really super useful tool and it's going to give us the ability to send those console
messages and be able to read them pick them up and console messages the way they work is they give us
the ability to pass some information from our script into the console and the console is not actually
meant to be seen by the average web user.
It's meant for developers and for debugging purposes.
So if you've opened up your dev tools you can see that there's a number of tabs here at the top and
just go over to the second tab here which is called console.
You do have some additional options for your dev tools where you can dock it to the left.
You can also dock it to the right hand side.
You can talk it to the bottom and in my case what I'm doing is I'm just putting it in a separate window.
So now that we've got dev tools open let's open up our editor and we're going to type some javascript
code and the javascript that we're going to be typing is going to be just simple output messages that
we're going to be able to pick up within the console itself.
The other console is super useful when you're debugging your applications or if you just want to find
out some more information about what's happening within your script.
So in this case we're going to just send ourselves a simple message of hello world and this is going
to be executed within our script and we're going to see it output within the console.
So when I refreshed the console I can see that I've got.
Hello world.
Being output and I've got the line the where the code is being executed outside of the file and the
file path of where that code is being executed.
And this is again where it becomes really really really useful because you know at what point this variable
is being output.
So if you wanted to log something as the code is being executed this is the place to do it.
And this is the way to do it.
You get Also another really nice thing about the cons. is once you've got this open your dev tools you
can actually type in different javascript statements and they actually get executed within your console.
So I can type in something like console log and this is going to be the same thing as typing it here
with the script.
It's up to it's just getting executed within this instance.
The open browser.
If I refreshed this console log here is going to be gone whereas my scripts is always going to execute
it.
So that's what the big difference here is.
But this gives us really easy access to write javascript statements and have them output directly within
our console and we can see what the output is going to be.
So we know that we type console log.
Our output is going to be hello.
And that's what's going to get displayed within the console tab of our browser.
So what I want you to do now is pause the video.
Try it for yourself.
Go ahead and open up chrome and then browse over to the console tab and type in console log and take
yourself a nice interesting message and see what happens.
And then once you complete that then you can go ahead and open up your editor and type in that same
code or something different.
Maybe another interesting message to yourself within your editor.
Save the page and open up your dev tools and see the message being displayed within the console tab.
Try that out.
Pause the video.
Try it for yourself.
Get comfortable with using the console because we are going to be using it quite a bit within this course
and it does become really really useful as you are debugging your code and you're working with javascript
so I hope you got a chance to try that out.
And I really do want you to become really comfortable with using the console because we are going to
be using it throughout this course.
So let's try something else so we saw that we can type in a stray message within the console and we
can see it.
It's shown here as the strings being output.
We can also do some math here so if we want to do for Plus-X we can see that when we refresh the page
we get the value of 10 being output.
So what's happening here is that when javascript comes to this statement and knows that we're outputting
some content within the console and it encounters the two numbers and it says OK well we've got four
plus six.
So it renders that arithmetic and sends it in the console and we can see the computed value of four
Plus-X being shown within our window.
So now let's have some more fun with Javascript.
So we saw that we can output console log.
So there's a few other things that we can output as well to make it a little bit more interesting and
a little bit more colorful.
So one of the ways that we can use console log is actually not use console log at all and we can output
console errors so basically this simulates opening an error message into our console.
So for whatever reason if you want to output error or the word error at a certain point as our script
is being executed out we can see that that gets rendered.
So line 16.
We're putting an error message within the console and this is what the contents of that message are.
So we can do some other things as well within a console so we can do a warning message and basically
similar to the error message.
Basically it sends a warning message into the console and so this one is not as strong as the error
but it also is great to get people's attention or developers attention.
So if there is something in particular within your code that you want to be able to maybe come back
to or if there's a bug there that you want someone to take a closer look at.
This is a great way to really isolate what's happening within that code and pass a message within the
console.
So another thing that we can do with in our console is we can make it even more colorful.
So I did say that console log can maybe get a little bit boring if we're just opening this black text
and the numbers are blue.
We can also enhance this by adding a little bit of styling.
So this is going to work in the same way that CSSA does.
So do the percentage sign and we do see and basically what that is doing is that's telling the statement
as it's being executed and that we've got some CSSA that's attached to it and the format for doing this
is going to be exactly the same as you would expect when you're typing CSSA.
So if we want it hello world to be green we can change hello world to be green just by doing that percentage
sign see and then whatever CSSA want to add in there.
We could do there as well.
So let's try something else as well and we can really have quite a bit of fun with this.
And again this is just really useful stuff as you're outputting information within the console.
So for whatever reason if you want to have a little bit of color within your output you can really easily
do that by we can do maybe color yellow and let's do a background.
So instead of a background of white Let's do black background.
So now we've got hello world is going to be output in yellow with a black background and we can see
that it gets rendered within the console within that format that we've indicated.
So I do encourage you to try it out for yourself as it is really important to become familiar with working
within the console and all of these messages that were passing back and forth are going to become more
apparent and we're going to see the use of them as we progress the course.
It's really important to understand that debugging is one of the things that you need to do as a developer
on a regular basis and having the tools there on the ready in order to do that debugging is an essential
part of developing applications in the next lesson.
We're going to be taking this one step further and we're going to be looking at comments and comments
as another way that we can have some additional information within our coding in order to utilize it
as we developed our coding.
So that's coming up.